
TAKE THEIR WORDS FOR IT!
ì...the ëStar Warsí of interactive computer adventure games,
a sophisticated entertainment that touches the intellect
as well as the adrenal glands.î
THE DETROIT FREE PRESS
ìThe program is so lifelike I find myself talking to it.î
Curtis, 26, Salesclerk
Phoenix
ìI use ZORK with new employees to get them to relax with the computer
(before they learn their regular jobs).î
Lawrence, 44, Manager
Pacific Palisades, California
ìAs I typed READ THE LEAFLET, I felt the hair on my neck prickle.
I remembered having the same sensation on first reading Edgar Allen Poe at age 11.
It was as if a little voice were saying, ëThis is creepy and weird ... but donít put it down!í
I barely noticed my wife tiptoe out of the room.î
From ìHow ZORK Took Over My Life,î
by Mike Oppenheim, M.D.
In MEDICAL ECONOMICS magazine
ìNice big vocabulary, mind-boggling situations and logical thinking.
I can use my brain!!î
Diane, 14
Omaha
ìGreat!!î
Douglas, 47, Teacher
Mountain View, California
ìAll-Time Most Popular Adventureî
SOFTALK READERSí POLL
ìWOW!î
Michael, 37, Minister
Lubbock, Texas


n 659 GUE*, the Kingdom of
Quendor was relatively small, encom-
passing seven-and-a-half provinces on
the western shore of the Great Sea, an
agrarian land whose major products
were rope and mosquito netting. It was the thirty-first
year of the reign of Zilbo III, part of a dynasty dating
back more than six centuries to Entharion the Wise, the
first King of Quendor. However, that dynasty was
about to end with the ascension of Duncanthrax to
the throne of Quendor on the final day of 659.
Little is known about what became of Zilbo after
659. Some say he was killed during a palace revolt, or
simply died from too much reveling while celebrating
the upcoming New Year. There is evidence that he
was exiled to a villa where he invented the card game
Double Fanucci.
Likewise, historians disagree about Duncanthraxís
life prior to 659. A petition signed by palace guards
in 657, asking for an increase in the mosquito netting
allotment, bears a signature that looks suspiciously
like ìDuncanthrax.î Some historians insist that
Duncanthrax was general of the Royal Militia. One
legend even suggests that Duncanthrax was a demon
who assumed human form. Another legend describes
him as a former rope salesman.
Whatever his origins, Duncanthrax quickly devel-
oped a reputation for cruelty, bloodthirstiness and
aggressiveness, thus earning himself the nickname
ìThe Bellicose King.î He raised a tremendous army
and began a systematic conquest of the neighboring
kingdoms. Within three years, Duncanthrax ruled an
empire that controlled virtually all the land between
the Great Sea and the Kovalli Desert.
*Adding ìGUEî after a year did not become common practice until the
latter part of the eighth century.
An ancient villa on the outskirts of Mithicus, similar to the one where Zilbo
may have lived in exile.
C H A P T E R O N E
n 665, the forces of Duncanthrax van-
quished the Antharian Armada at the
famous battle of Fort Griffspotter. The
island-nation of Antharia was, at the
time, the world's premier sea power,
and this victory gave Duncanthrax undisputed con-
trol of the Great Sea and put the superb ship-building
facilities of Antharia at his disposal. (The conquest of
Antharia also gave Duncanthrax possession of Anthar-
iaís famed granola mines. Unfortunately, no one in
Quendor liked granola.)
Within months, Quendorís navy was returning
from voyages with tales of a magical land on the dis-
tant eastern shore of the Great Sea. Duncanthrax was
incensed that this vast land existed outside his domin-
ion, and spent many nights storming the halls of his
castle bellowing at his servants and advisors. Then,
one day, he had a sudden inspiration: assemble a
huge fleet, cross the Great Sea and conquer the lands
on the eastern shore. Not only would he extend his
empire, but he'd finally have a market for all that use-
less granola.
As Duncanthraxís invasion swept across the new
lands, he made a startling discovery: huge caverns
and tunnels, populated by gnomes, trolls and other
magical races, all of whom loved granola. Even as
Duncanthrax conquered this region, his imagination
was inspired by this natural underground formation.
Questions, Discussions, Projects and Further Readings:
1. Would you have left a job as a rope salesman to become King of Quendor? List the pros and cons.
2. Find Quendor on a modern map. Is it a large area? What natural features of the area would have helped
Quendor to conquer all the neighboring lands?
3. Do you think that Duncanthrax was a mean king for attacking other kingdoms? What other reasons besides
meanness might he have had?
4. Stage a mock peace conference, with one of your classmates playing Duncanthrax and other classmates
playing the kings of the surrounding lands. The other kings should try to convince Duncanthrax not to
attack them.
5. Read The New Yearís Revolt, by Jezbar Foolion.
C H A P T E R T W O
If these caverns and tunnels were possible in nature,
so might they be formed by humans! Duncanthrax
realized that by burrowing into the ground he could
increase the size of his empire fivefold or even tenfold!
The Frobozz Magic Construction Company (the
forerunner of the modern industrial giant FrobozzCo
International) was formed to undertake this project in
668. For the remaining 20 years of Duncanthraxís
reign, cavern-building continued at a breakneck pace.
The natural caverns in the eastern lands were ex-
panded tremendously, and new caverns and passages
were dug in the western lands, chiefly in the vicinity
of Duncanthraxís castle, Egreth. By the time of his
death in 688, Duncanthrax ruled virtually all territory
in the known world, above and below ground.
In 666, Duncanthraxís navy returned from its expedition to the eastern shore of the Great Sea with tales of a magical underground civilization (left)
and giant red xís (right).
Questions, Discussions, Projects and Further Readings:
1. What would it be like to live underground? If there are any caves near your home, spend a week underground
to see what it's like.
2. Read Construction of the Empire, by Mumboz Agrippa, Wouldnít It Be Fun To Live Underground?, by Lorissa
Frob and The Seventy Year Snidgel, by Harv Dornfrob.
These pie charts show the fiscal priorities of the Empire under three kings who ruled centuries apart: Bozbo IV, Duncanthrax and Dimwit Flathead.
EXPENDATURES OF THREE ROYAL GOVERNMENTS
580 GUE 680 GUE 780 GUE
14% 2% Royal
Military Bureaucracy
18%
Construction
of Roads
66% Other and Bridges
5% Other
54% Construction
of Caverns 33% Military
8% Royal
Bureaucracy
2% Other
29%
Construction
of Dams, etc.
68% Royal
Bureaucracy
1% Military
fter Duncanthrax, the throne was occu-
pied by a long series of his descen-
dants. These were unspectacular rulers,
who took on the surname Flathead, for
obscure reasons not necessarily related
to the planar shape of their pates. During this period,
there was very little change in the Empire, as the con-
quered kingdoms were assimilated into Quendor and
the frantic pace of tunneling gradually abated.
In 770, nearly a century after the death of Duncan-
thrax, his great-great-grandson, Dimwit Flathead,
assumed the throne. Lord Dimwit, as he liked to be
called, was a colorful character, but was also the single
worst ruler the Empire ever produced. His vanity was
surpassed only by his outrageous sense of proportion.
For example, his coronation took 13 years to plan (and
therefore took place two-thirds of the way through his
reign), lasted an additional year and a half, and cost 12
times the Empireís GNP.
Dimwit was the first king to call Quendor ìThe
Great Underground Empire,î and within a few years
the new name had completely displaced the older
one. Dimwit also renamed the Great Sea ìthe Flat-
head Ocean,î and seemed to prefer the newer lands on
the eastern shore. He even moved the Empireís capi-
tal from Egreth (in the westlands) to Flatheadia (in the
eastlands).
While Dimwit certainly inherited Duncanthraxís
ambition and ingratiating personality, he directed
them in a somewhat less productive fashion. Whereas
Duncanthrax used his power to expand his empire,
Dimwit was motivated to realize his bizarre whims.
Raising the kingdomís tax rate to just over 98%, Dim-
wit began a series of grandiose projects that soon
earned him the title ìFlathead the Excessive.î Among
these projects: the construction of mammoth Flood
Control Dam Number Three (a massive edifice with
virtually no useful purpose, since it never rains under-
C H A P T E R T H R E E
IMPORTANT POLITICAL AND CULTURAL EVENTS
This time line shows the dates of some of the events that shaped the history of The Great Underground Empire. Cultural events are listed above the time line
and political events are listed below.
668 FrobozzCo International Incorporated
691 1st Double Fanucci Championship
732 Frobozz Philharmonic Founded
777 Royal Museum Dedicated
841 Elvis Flatheadís First Concert
883 Great Underground Empire Falls
865 Granola Riots
789 Dimwit Flathead Dies
770 Dimwit Flathead Ascends Throne
688 Duncanthrax Dies
666 Underground Caverns Discovered
659 Duncanthrax Ascends Throne
Cultural Events
Political Events
ground), the creation of the Royal Museum (to house
the crown jewels), the defoliation of four hundred
thousand acres of lush forest (to erect a nine-bloit-high
statue of himself in the Fublio Valley) and the produc-
tion of enormous granola smelters of Plumbat.
Just before his death in 789, Flathead was rumored
to be planning his greatest dream: the creation of a
new continent in the center of the Flathead Ocean.
The outline and contours of the new continent would
have been a gigantic reproduction of his own visage.
Lord Dimwit erected a nine-bloit-high statue of himself to lend credence to the Royal motto, ìA truly great leader is larger than life.î
Questions, Discussions, Projects and Further Readings:
1. How many things can you think of that are named after the Flatheads? Make a list.
2. Try to collect 10 zorkmids from everyone on your block, telling them that the money will be used to erect a
giant statue of yourself. Use force if necessary. See if the others on your block begin to resent you.
3. Read The Lives of the Twelve Flatheads, by Boswell Barwell.
C H A P T E R F O U R
Questions, Discussions, Projects and Further Readings:
1. Collect several horses for yourself and your classmates. Ride through the center of your town, pillaging
stores, burning homes and slaughtering young children and old women. Afterwards, ask people around
town what it was like to live in a lawless state.
2. Read The Dark Age of Frobozz, by Sybar Zeebin and So You Want To Sack an Empire, by Uncle Frobizzmus.
lthough Dimwit was certainly the most
flagrantly indulgent ruler in the history
of The Great Underground Empire,
most of the Flatheads who followed
him did their best to uphold the tradi-
tion of excessiveness. The high level of taxation con-
tinued, although the money was increasingly spent
not on massive construction projects but on extrava-
gant parties and long vacation trips for members of
the Royal Family.
In 883, after countless years of decadence and over-
taxation, The Great Underground Empire collapsed,
the Royal Treasury was sacked and everyone moved
somewhere else.
THE KINGS OF QUENDOR
This table shows the rulers of Quendor, later known as The Great Underñ
ground Empire, through its collapse in 883 GUE.
The Entharion Dynasty
Entharion the Wise 0-41
Mysterion the Brave 41-55
Zylon the Aged 55-398
Zilbo I 398-423
Bozbo I 423-429
Zilbo II 429-451
Harmonious Fzort 451-477
Bozbo II 477-481
Thaddium Fzort 481-545
Mumbo I 545-569
Bozbo III 569-575
Bozbo IV 575-619
Mumbo II 619-628
Zilbo III 628-659
The Flathead Dynasty
Duncanthrax the Bellicose 659-688
Belwit the Flat 688-701
Frobwit the Flatter 701-727
Timberthrax Flathead 727-738
Phloid Flathead 738-755
Mumberthrax Flathead 755-770
Dimwit Flathead 770-789
Loowit Flathead 789-813
Duncwit Flathead 813-843
Barbawit Flathead 843-845
Idwit Oogle Flathead 845-881
Wurb Flathead 881-883
Instruction
Manual for
ZORK I:
The Great Underground Empire
Instruction Manual 9
10 Instruction Manual
Instruction Manual 11
Instruction Manual for ZORK I:
The Great Underground Empire
Welcome to ZORK! You are about to experience a
classic interactive fantasy, set in a magical universe.
The ZORK trilogy takes place in the ruins of an an-
cient empire lying far underground. You, a dauntless
treasure-hunter, are venturing into this dangerous
land in search of wealth and adventure. Because
each part of the ZORK saga is a completely indepen-
dent story, you can explore them in any order. How-
ever, since ZORK I is the least difficult, it is usually
the best place to begin.
Many strange tales have been told of the fabulous
treasures, exotic creatures and diabolical puzzles in
the Great Underground Empire. As an aspiring ad-
venturer, you will undoubtedly want to locate the
treasures and deposit them in your trophy case.
Youíd better equip yourself with a source of light (for
the caverns are dark) and weapons (for some of the
inhabitants are unfriendlyóespecially the thief, a
skilled pickpocket and ruthless opponent).
If youíre experienced with Infocomís interactive
fiction, you may not feel like reading this entire man-
ual. However, you should at least read about scoring
(on page 12) and look at the appendix of recognized
verbs (on page 19).
Table of Contents
An Overview Page 12
• What is interactive fiction?
• Moving around
• Turns and scoring
Tips for Novices 13
Nine useful pointers about interactive
fiction
Communicating with ZORK 14
• Basic sentences
• Complex sentences
• Talking to characters in the story
• Vocabulary limitations
Starting and Stopping 16
• Starting ZORK (ìBooting Upî)
• Saving and restoring
• Quitting and restarting
Appendix A: Quick Reference Guide 17
This briefly describes the most impor-
tant things to know about interactive
fiction. It is vital that you know all these
things before you begin your adventure.
Appendix B: Important Commands 18
Appendix C: Some Recognized Verbs 19
Appendix D: ZORK Complaints 20
Appendix E: Sample Transcript 21
and Map
Appendix F: Weíre Never Satisfied 23
Appendix G: If You Have Technical 23
Problems
Appendix H: Author Biographies 24
Appendix I: Warranty and Copyright 24
Information
12 Instruction Manual
An Overview
Interactive fiction is a story in which you are the main
character. Your own thinking and imagination deter-
mine the actions of that character and guide the story
from start to finish.
Each work of Infocomís interactive fiction, such
as the three ZORK adventures, presents you with a
series of locations, items, characters and events. You
can interact with these in a variety of ways.
To move from place to place, type the direction
you want to go. When you begin your adventure, itís
a good idea to become familiar with your surround-
ings by exploring every location and reading each
description carefully. (You may notice that ZORK
occasionally refers to a location as a ìroom,î even if
you are outdoors.) As you explore the Empire, it is
helpful to draw a map of the geography.
An important element of interactive fiction is puz-
zle-solving. You should think of a locked door or a
ferocious beast not as a permanent obstacle, but
merely as a puzzle to be tackled. Solving puzzles will
frequently involve bringing a certain item with you
and then using it in the proper way.
In ZORK, time passes only in response to your
input. You might imagine a clock that ticks once for
each sentence you type, and the adventure progress-
es only at each tick. Nothing happens until you
type a sentence and press the RETURN (or ENTER)
key, so you can plan your turns as slowly and care-
fully as you want.
To measure your progress, ZORK I keeps track of
your score. Youíll get points for solving puzzles,
acquiring treasures, performing certain actions and
visiting certain locations. You will also get points for
putting treasures into the trophy case. There may be
a penalty for getting ìkilled.î
Instruction Manual 13
Tips for Novices
1. Draw a map. It should include each location, the
directions connecting it to adjoining locations and any
interesting objects there. (See the small sample map
that goes along with the sample transcript on page
21.) Some puzzles are almost impossible to solve
without completely mapping the area. Note that
there are 10 possible directions, plus IN and OUT.
And since some passages twist and curve, going
NORTH from Place A to Place B doesnít always mean
that SOUTH will take you back to Place A.
2. Most objects that you can pick up are important,
either as treasures or as solutions to puzzles, or
both!
3. Save your place often. That way, if you mess up
or get ìkilled,î you wonít have to start over from the
beginning. See page 16 for instructions.
4. Read carefully. There are often clues in the de-
scriptions of locations and objects, as well as in la-
bels, engravings, books and so on. Even strange or
dangerous actions may provide clues and might
prove to be fun! You can always save your position
first if you want. Hereís a fun example:
> PUT ON THE GREEN CALICO HAT
The munchkins giggle, but remain unconvinced that
youíre a witch.
Youíve just learned there is something which might
convince the munchkins that youíre a witch. They
might even give you their enchanted broom. Perhaps
if you put on that blue calico dress you came across
earlier in the storyÖ
5. Unlike other ìadventure gamesî that you may
have played, there are many possible routes to the
end of ZORK. Some puzzles have more than one
solution; other puzzles donít need to be solved at all.
Sometimes you will have to solve one puzzle in order
to obtain the item(s) or information you need to solve
another puzzle.
6. You may find it helpful to explore ZORK with an-
other person. Different people may find different
puzzles easy and can often complement each other.
7. If you really have difficulty, you can order a hint
booklet and a complete map using the order form in
your package. You donít need the hint booklet to
enjoy the story, but it will make solving ZORK I
easier.
8. Read the sample transcript on page 21 to get a feel
for how Infocomís interactive fiction works.
9. You can word a command in many different ways.
For example, to turn the brass lantern on, you could
use any of the following:
> LIGHT LAMP.
> TURN ON THE LAMP.
> TURN THE LAMP ON.
> ACTIVATE THE LAMP.
> LIGHT THE BRASS LANTERN.
In fact, if the lamp is the only light source present,
just typing LIGHT is enough, since ZORK will as-
sume you meant the lamp. But more about that in
the next section...
14 Instruction Manual
Communicating with ZORK
In ZORK, you type your sentence in plain English
each time you see the prompt (>). ZORK usually
acts as if your sentence begins ìI want to...,î al-
though you shouldnít actually type those words. You
can use the words like ìTHEî if you want, and you can
use capital letters if you want; ZORK doesnít care
either way.
When you finish typing a sentence, press the RE-
TURN (or ENTER) key and ZORK will process your
request. ZORK will respond, telling you whether your
request is possible at this point in the story and what
happened as a result.
ZORK recognizes your words by their first six
letters, and all subsequent letters are ignored.
Therefore, CANDLE, CANDLEs and CANDLEstick
would all be treated as the same word by ZORK.
To move around, just type the desired direction.
You can use the eight compass directions: NORTH,
SOUTH, EAST, WEST, NORTHEAST, NORTHWEST,
SOUTHEAST and SOUTHWEST. You can abbreviate
these to N, S, E, W, NE, NW, SE and SW, respec-
tively. You can use UP (or U) and DOWN (or D). IN
and OUT will also work in certain places.
ZORK understands many different kinds of sen-
tences. Here are several examples. (Note that some
of these objects do not actually appear in ZORK.)
> WALK NORTH
> DOWN
> NE
> GO SOUTH
> U
> TAKE BOX
> PICK UP THE WOODEN BOX
> DROP IT
> PUSH THE BUTTON
> OPEN THE WOODEN DOOR
> EXAMINE THE SCUBA GEAR
> LOOK BEHIND THE STATUE
> LOOK UNDER THE ROCK
> LOOK INSIDE THE BUBBLING CAULDRON
> KILL THE BEAR WITH THE GUN
> SHOOT BEAR WITH LARGE RIFLE
You can use multiple objects with certain verbs if
you separate them by the word AND or by a comma.
Some examples:
> TAKE LAMP, JAR, FLUTE
> DROP THE DAGGER, LANCE, AND MACE
> PUT THE GOLD BAR AND THE PEARL IN THE
TROPHY CASE
The word ALL refers to every visible object except
those inside something else. If there were an apple
on the ground and an orange inside a cabinet, TAKE
ALL would take the apple but not the orange.
> TAKE ALL
> TAKE ALL THE BOOKS
> TAKE ALL FROM THE DESK
> GIVE ALL BUT THE PENCIL TO THE NYMPH
> DROP ALL EXCEPT THE DART GUN
Instruction Manual 15
You can include several sentences on one input
line if you separate them by the word THEN or by a
period. (Note that each sentence will still count as a
turn.) You donít need a period at the end of the input
line. For example, you could type all of the following
at once, before pressing the RETURN (or ENTER)
key:
> NORTH.READ THE BOOK.DROP IT THEN BURN
IT WITH TORCH
If ZORK doesnít understand one of the sentences in
your input line, or if something unusual happens, it
will ignore the rest of your input line (see ìZORK
Complaintsî on page 20).
There are only two kinds of questions that ZORK
understands: WHAT and WHERE. Here are two
examples that you can actually try in ZORK:
> WHAT IS A GRUE?
> WHERE IS THE ZORKMID?
You will meet other people and creatures as you
explore ZORK. You can ìtalkî to some of these
beings by typing their name, then a comma,
then whatever you want them to do. Here are
some examples:
> GNOME, GIVE ME THE KEY
> TREE SPRITE, OPEN THE SECRET DOOR
> JOEL, WAIT HERE
> WARLOCK, TAKE THE SPELL SCROLL
THEN FOLLOW ME
> MIKE, NORTH.GET THE BRAN MUFFIN.
THROW IT AT THE DWARF
Notice that in the last two examples, you are giving
one person more than one command on the same
input line.
You can use quotes to answer a question or say
something ìout loud.î For example:
> SAY ìHELLO SAILORî
> ANSWER ìA ZEBRAî
ZORK tries to guess what you really mean when
you don't give enough information. For example, if
you say that you want to do something, but not what
you want to do it to or with, ZORK will sometimes
decide that there is only one possible object that you
could mean. When it does so, it will tell you. For
example:
> BURN THE KINDLING
(with the torch)
The kindling catches fire and is consumed.
or
> GIVE THE SWORD
(to the gnome)
The gnome, a sworn pacifist, refuses to take it.
If your sentence is ambiguous, ZORK will ask
what you really mean. You can answer most of these
questions briefly by supplying the missing informa-
tion, rather than typing the entire input again. You
can do this only at the very next prompt. Some ex-
amples:
> TIE THE ROPE
What do you want to tie the rope to?
> THE MAST
The rope is now tied to the mast.
or
> HIT THE NAIL WITH THE HAMMER
Which nail do you mean, the shiny nail or the rusty
nail?
> SHINY
The shiny nail is driven halfway into the piece of
wood.
ZORK uses many words in its descriptions that it
will not recognize in your sentences. For example,
you might read, ìAbove you, moonlit clouds flit
across the evening sky.î However, if ZORK doesnít
recognize the words SKY or CLOUDS in your input,
you can assume that the sky and clouds are not im-
portant to your completion of the story, except to
provide you with a more vivid description of where
you are or what is going on. ZORK recognizes over
600 words, nearly all that you are likely to use in
your sentences. If ZORK doesnít know a word you
used, or any of its common synonyms, you are al-
most certainly trying something that is not important
in your adventure.
16 Instruction Manual
Starting and Stopping
Starting the story: Now that you know what to expect
when you venture into the caverns of ZORK, itís
time for you to ìbootî your disk. To load ZORK,
follow the instructions on the Reference Card in your
ZORK I package.
Following the copyright notice and the release
number of the story, you will see a description of the
place where the story begins.
Hereís a quick exercise to help you get accus-
tomed to interacting with ZORK I. Try the following
command first:
> OPEN THE MAILBOX
Then press the RETURN (or ENTER) key. ZORK I
will respond with:
Opening the mailbox reveals a leaflet.
Now try:
> READ THE LEAFLET
After you press the RETURN (or ENTER) key, ZORK
I will respond:
(Taken)
Welcome to ZORK!
ZORK is a story of adventure, danger and low cunning.
In it you will explore some of the most amazing territory
ever seen by mortals. No computer should be without
one.
Saving and restoring: It will probably take you many
days to complete ZORK I. Using the SAVE feature,
you can continue at a later time without having to
start over from the beginning, just as you can place a
bookmark in a book you are reading. SAVE puts a
ìsnapshotî of your place in the story onto another
diskette. If you are a cautious adventurer, you may
want to save your place before (or after) trying
something dangerous or tricky. That way, you can go
back to that position later, even if you have gotten
lost or ìkilledî since then.
To save your place in the story, type SAVE at the
prompt (>), and then press the RETURN (or ENTER)
key. Then follow the instructions for saving and re-
storing on your Reference Card. Some systems re-
quire a blank disk, initialized and formatted, for
saves. Using a disk with data on it (not counting
other ZORK saves) may result in the loss of that data,
depending on your system.
You can restore a saved position any time you
want. To do so, type RESTORE at the prompt (>),
and press the RETURN (or ENTER) key. Then follow
the instructions on your Reference Card. You can
then continue the story from the point where you
used the SAVE command. You can type LOOK for a
description of where you are.
Quitting and restarting: If you want to start over
from the beginning of the story, type RESTART.
(This is usually faster than re-booting.) Just to make
sure, ZORK will ask if you really want to start over.
If you do, type Y or YES, and press the RETURN
(or ENTER) key.
If you want to stop, type QUIT. Once again,
ZORK will ask if this is really what you want to do.
If you do, type Y and press the RETURN key.
Remember when you RESTART or QUIT: if you
want to be able to return to your current position, you
must first do a SAVE.
Instruction Manual 17
Appendix A
Quick Reference Guide
The object of ZORK I is to find the treasures of the
Great Underground Empire and put them in your
trophy case.
1. To start the story (ìboot upî), see the separate
Reference Card in your ZORK package.
2. When you see the prompt (>) on your screen,
ZORK is waiting for your command. There are
four kinds of sentences or commands that ZORK
understands:
A. Direction commands: To move from place to
place, just type the direction you want to go: N (or
NORTH), E, S, W, NE, SE, NW, SW, U (or UP),
D, IN, OUT.
B. Actions: Just type whatever you want to do.
Some examples: READ THE BOOK or OPEN THE
DOOR or LOOK THROUGH THE WINDOW.
Once youíre familiar with simple commands,
youíll want to use more complex ones as described
in ìCommunicating with ZORKî on page 14.
C. Commands given to people: To talk to charac-
ters in the story, type their name, then a comma,
then what you want to say to them. For example:
TROLL, GIVE ME THE AXE or OLD MAN, GO
NORTH.
D. Special one-word commands: some one-word
commands, such as INVENTORY or DIAGNOSE,
give you specific information or affect your output.
A list of these appears in the ìImportant Com-
mandsî appendix on page 18.
3. Important! After typing your sentence or com-
mand, you must press the RETURN (or ENTER) key
before ZORK will respond.
4. On most computers, your screen will have a spe-
cial line called the status line. It tells you the name
of your current location, your score, and the number
of turns you have taken.
5. You can pick up and carry many of the items youíll
find in the story. For example, if you type TAKE THE
NECKLACE, you will be carrying it. Type INVEN-
TORY to see a list of everything you are carrying.
6. When you want to stop, save your place for later,
or start over, read the ìStarting and Stoppingî sec-
tion on page 16.
7. If you have trouble, refer to the specific section of
the manual for more detailed instructions.
18 Instruction Manual
Appendix B
Important Commands
There are a number of one-word commands which
you can type instead of a sentence. You can use them
over and over as needed. Some count as a turn,
others do not. Type the command after the prompt
(>) and hit the RETURN (or ENTER) key.
AGAINóZORK will usually respond as if you had
repeated your previous sentence. Among the cases
where AGAIN will not work is if you were just talking
to another character. You can abbreviate AGAIN to
G.
BRIEFóThis tells ZORK to give you the full descrip-
tion of a location only the first time you enter it. On
subsequent visits, ZORK will tell you only the name
of the location and the objects present. This is how
ZORK will normally act, unless you tell it otherwise
using the VERBOSE or SUPERBRIEF commands.
DIAGNOSEóZORK will give you a medical report
of your physical condition. This is particularly useful if
you have just survived a dangerous battle or if you are
under the effects of a magical spell.
INVENTORYóZORK will list what you are carry-
ing. You can abbreviate INVENTORY to I.
LOOKóThis tells ZORK to describe your location in
full detail. You can abbreviate LOOK to L.
QUITóThis lets you stop. If you want to save your
position before quitting, follow the instructions in
ìStarting and Stoppingî on page 16. You can abbrevi-
ate QUIT to Q.
RESTARTóThis stops the story and starts over from
the beginning.
RESTOREóThis restores a story position made using
the SAVE command. See ìStarting and Stoppingî for
more details.
SAVEóThis makes a ìsnapshotî of your current
story position onto your storage disk. You can return
to a saved position in the future using the RESTORE
command. See ìStarting and Stoppingî for more
details.
SCOREóZORK will show your current score and
the number of turns you have taken. It will also tell
you your rank, which is based on your score.
Instruction Manual 19
SCRIPTóThis command tells your printer to begin
making a transcript of the story as you venture on-
wards. A transcript may aid your memory but is not
necessary. It will work only on certain computers;
read your Reference Card for details.
SUPERBRIEFóThis commands ZORK to display only
the name of a place you have entered, even if you
have never been there before. In this mode, ZORK
will not even mention which objects are present. Of
course, you can always get a description of your
location, and the items there, by typing LOOK. In
SUPERBRIEF mode, the blank line between turns will
be eliminated. This mode is meant for adventurers
who are already very familiar with the geography.
Also see VERBOSE and BRIEF.
UNSCRIPTóThis commands your printer to stop
making a transcript.
VERBOSEóThis tells ZORK that you want a com-
plete description of each location and the objects in it
every time you enter a location, even if youíve been
there before. Also see BRIEF and SUPERBRIEF.
VERSIONóZORK responds by showing you the
release number and the serial number of your copy of
the story. Please include this information if you ever
report a ìbugî in ZORK.
WAITóThis will cause time in the story to pass.
Normally, between turns, nothing happens in the
story. You could leave your computer, take a nap and
return to the story to find that nothing has changed.
You can use WAIT to make time pass in the story
without doing anything. For example, if you encoun-
ter an alien being, you could WAIT to see what it will
do. Or, if you are in a moving vehicle, you could
WAIT to see where it will go. You can abbreviate
WAIT to Z.
Appendix C
Some Recognized Verbs
This is only a partial list of the verbs that all three
ZORK adventures understand. There are many
more. Remember that you can use a variety of prep-
ositions with them. For example, LOOK can become
LOOK INSIDE, LOOK BEHIND, LOOK UNDER,
LOOK THROUGH, LOOK AT and so on.
ANSWER FOLLOW SAY
ATTACK GIVE SEARCH
BLOW INFLATE SHAKE
BREAK JUMP SLIDE
BURN KICK SMELL
CLIMB KNOCK STAY
CLOSE LIGHT STRIKE
COUNT LISTEN SWIM
CROSS LOCK TAKE
CUT LOOK TELL
DEFLATE LOWER THROW
DIG MOVE TIE
DRINK OPEN TOUCH
DROP POUR TURN
EAT PRAY UNLOCK
ENTER PULL WAKE
EXAMINE PUSH WALK
EXIT PUT WAVE
EXTINGUISH RAISE WEAR
FILL READ WIND
20 Instruction Manual
Appendix D
ZORK Complaints
ZORK will complain if you type a sentence that con-
fuses it completely. ZORK will then ignore the rest
of the input line. (Unusual events, such as being
attacked, may also cause ZORK to ignore the rest of
the sentences you typed, since the event may have
changed your situation drastically.) Some of ZORKís
complaints:
I DONíT KNOW THE WORD ì(your word).î The
word you typed is not in the storyís vocabulary.
Sometimes using a synonym or rephrasing will help.
If not, ZORK probably doesnít know the idea you
were trying to get across.
YOU USED THE WORD ì(your word)î IN A WAY
THAT I DONíT UNDERSTAND. ZORK knows the
word you typed, but couldnít use it in that sense.
Usually this is because ZORK knows the word as a
different part of speech. For example, if you typed
PRESS THE LOWER BUTTON, you are using LOWER
as an adjective, but ZORK might know LOWER only
as a verb, as in LOWER THE ROPE.
THAT SENTENCE ISNíT ONE I RECOGNIZE. The
sentence you typed may have been gibberish, such
as GIVE TROLL WITH SWORD. Or, you may have
typed a reasonable sentence but used a syntax that
ZORK does not recognize, such as SMELL UNDER
THE ROCK. Try rephrasing the sentence.
THERE WAS NO VERB IN THAT SENTENCE! Unless
you are answering a question, each sentence must
have a verb (or a command) in it somewhere.
THERE SEEMS TO BE A NOUN MISSING IN THAT
SENTENCE! This usually means that your sentence
was incomplete, such as EAT THE BLUE.
THERE WERE TOO MANY NOUNS IN THAT SEN-
TENCE. An example is PUT THE SOUP IN THE BOWL
WITH THE LADLE, which has three noun ìphrases,î
one more than ZORK can digest in a single action.
I BEG YOUR PARDON? You hit the RETURN
(or ENTER) key without typing anything.
ITíS TOO DARK TO SEE. In the story, there was not
enough light to perform your action.
I DONíT SEE WHAT YOU ARE REFERRING TO. You
used HIM, HER or IT, but ZORK isnít sure what per-
son or object you meant.
YOU CANíT SEE ANY ì(object)î HERE! The item
you referred to was not visible. It may be some-
where else, inside a closed container, and so on.
THE OTHER OBJECT(S) THAT YOU MENTIONED
ISNíT (ARENíT) HERE. You referred to two or more
items in the same sentence, and at least one of them
wasnít visible to you in your present location.
YOU CANíT GO THAT WAY. There was no passage
or exit in the direction you tried to move.
YOU CANíT USE MULTIPLE (IN)DIRECT OBJECTS
WITH ì(your verb).î You can refer to several items
at the same time only with certain verbs. Among the
more useful of these verbs are TAKE, DROP and PUT.
This restriction also applies to the use of ALL, as in
DROP ALL. For example, ATTACK will not work with
multiple objects; you couldnít say ATTACK ALL or
ATTACK THE WARLOCK AND THE ENCHANTER.
Instruction Manual 21
Appendix E
Sample Transcript and Map
This transcript is not from any of the ZORK adven-
tures, but it does show most of the usual things you
can do in ZORK. It contains several simple puzzles
and their solutions, and it will give you a good idea of
how Infocomís interactive fiction works. The playerís
sentences appear in capital letters after each prompt
(>). The map represents the terrain in the sample
transcript as you might have drawn it.
> APPLY THE BRAKES
The Frobozz Magic Go-Cart coasts to a stop.
Moss-lined Tunnel, in the Go-Cart
This is a long east-west tunnel whose walls are covered
with green and yellow mosses.
There is a jewel-studded monkey wrench here. (outside
the Go-Cart)
A bent and rusted monkey wrench is lying here. (outside
the Go-Cart)
> TAKE THE WRENCH
Which wrench do you mean, the jeweled monkey
wrench or the rusty monkey wrench?
> JEWELED
You canít reach it from inside the Go-Cart.
> WEST
Youíre not going anywhere until you stand up.
> GET OUT OF THE GO-CART
You are on your own feet again.
> TAKE THE JEWELED WRENCH
Taken.
> WEST
Lumber Yard
This is a huge room lined with metal shelves. There are
exits to the east, northeast, and west.
There is a small cardboard box here.
Piled on one of the shelves is a supply of lumber.
> TAKE THE BOX AND THE LUMBER
small cardboard box: Taken.
supply of lumber: Your load is too heavy.
> INVENTORY
You are carrying:
a lamp (providing light)
a glass jar
The glass jar contains:
a quantity of pomegranate juice
a jeweled monkey wrench
a dart gun
a small cardboard box
> DROP THE DART GUN
Dropped.
> TAKE THE LUMBER
Taken.
> LOOK INSIDE THE BOX
The small cardboard box is closed.
> OPEN IT
Opening the small cardboard box reveals a bunch of
two-inch nails.
> EXAMINE THE LUMBER
It consists of two rectangular pieces of wood, about 10
feet long, and perhaps a dozen shorter dowel-shaped
pieces.
> WALK NORTHEAST
Foremanís Office
This is the office of the lumber yard foreman. The only
exit is to the southwest.
22 Instruction Manual
> SW
Lumber Yard
There is a dart gun here.
> WALK WEST
Carpentry Shop
You are in a room furnished with wooden shelves, cabi-
nets, mantels and moldings, all gracefully carved out of
fine wood. An array of precision tools adorns the walls.
The only exit is south... unless you want to count the
opening in the roof.
A carpenter gnome is sitting here, twiddling his thumbs.
>UP
The opening is too high to reach.
>GNOME, BUILD A LADDER
ìIíd be glad to, but not for free!î
> GIVE THE JEWELED MONKEY WRENCH TO THE
GNOME
The gnome examines the jeweled monkey wrench care-
fully. "Thank you," he exclaims, adding it to his collection
of tools.
> GNOME, BUILD A LADDER
ìOh, yes, your ladder. Unfortunately, I have no
lumber.î
> GIVE THE LUMBER TO THE GNOME
The gnome accepts the supply of lumber.
> GNOME, BUILD LADDER
ìDarn it! Iím fresh out of nails.î
> GIVE NAILS
(to the gnome)
The gnome accepts the bunch of nails.
> GIVE THE LAMP TO THE GNOME
The gnome attempts to build a beautiful set of kitchen
cabinets out of the lamp. Finally, he gives up and hands
it back to you.
> GNOME, BUILD LADDER
The gnome grumbles but constructs a handsome
wooden ladder. He admires his handiwork and hands
you the ladder.
> PUT THE LADER THROUGH THE HOLE
I donít know the word ìlader.î
> PUT THE LADDER THROUGH THE HOLE
The ladder is now resting against the rim of the hole.
> UP
Youíre carrying too much to climb a ladder.
>I
You are carrying:
a lamp (providing light)
a glass jar
The glass jar contains:
a quantity of pomegranate juice
a small cardboard box
> DROP ALL BUT THE LAMP
glass jar: Dropped.
small cardboard box: Dropped.
> LOOK
Carpentry Shop
You are in a room furnished with wooden shelves, cabi-
nets, mantels and moldings, all gracefully carved out of
fine wood. An array of precision tools adorns the walls.
The only exit is south... unless you want to count the
opening in the roof.
A carpenter gnome is sitting here, twiddling his thumbs.
There is a glass jar here.
The glass jar contains:
a quantity of pomegranate juice
There is a small cardboard box here.
> UP
Monsterís Lair
This is the den of the dreaded Seven-Headed Snow
Monster of Snurth. It is quite chilly in here, and ice covers
the floor and walls. A ladder protrudes from a hole in
the ground, and sunlight comes from the cave entrance
to the east.
The Snow Monster, bellowing loudly, blocks the eastern
exit.
> DOWN.SOUTH.TAKE DART GUN.WEST.UP
Carpentry Shop
A carpenter gnome is sitting here, twiddling his thumbs.
There is a glass jar here.
The glass jar contains:
a quantity of pomegranate juice
There is a small cardboard box here.
Instruction Manual 23
Lumber Yard
There is a dart gun here.
Taken.
Carpentry Shop
A carpenter gnome is sitting here, twiddling his thumbs.
There is a glass jar here.
The glass jar contains:
a quantity of pomegranate juice
There is a small cardboard box here.
Monsterís Lair
The Snow Monster, bellowing loudly, blocks the eastern
exit.
> SHOOT MONSTER
What do you want to shoot the monster with?
> DART GUN
The Snow Monster clutches at the dart and then keels
over. His body vanishes in a cloud of acrid black smoke.
> EAST
Orange Grove
A path leads northeast through this small grove of or-
ange trees. A dark cave lies to the west. A sign is posted
near the grove.
> READ THE SIGN
ìWarning! These are poisonous oranges, not meant
for human consumption.
ñ Farmer Bozbarî
> EAT AN ORANGE
Aaarrrr! It burns your tongue and your throat!
***You have died***
A forest sprite appears, looking concerned. ìYouíve
done it again,î says the sprite, with a mixture of sympa-
thy and disgust. ìIíll give you only one more chance.î
She sprinkles some fairy dust on youÖ
Wooden Bridge
There is a lamp here.
> LOOK
Wooden Bridge
You are on a sturdy bridge leading northeast to south-
west. The river below flows quickly amongst pointy rocks.
There is a lamp here.
Appendix F
Weíre Never Satisfied
Here at Infocom, we take great pride in the quality of
our stories. Even after theyíre ìout the door,î weíre
constantly improving, honing and perfecting.
Your input is important. No matter how much
testing we do, it seems that some ìbugsî never
crawl into view until thousands of you begin doing all
those wild and crazy things to the story. If you find a
bug, or if you think a certain puzzle was too hard or
too easy, or if you have some other suggestion, or if
youíd just like to tell us your opinion of ZORK, drop
us a note! We love every excuse to stop working, and
a letter from you is just such an excuse! Write to:
INFOCOM, INC.
125 CambridgePark Drive
Cambridge, MA 02140
Attn: DIMWIT FLATHEAD
Appendix G
If You Have Technical Problems
You can call the Infocom Technical Support Team to
report bugs and technical problems, but not for hints
to solve puzzles, at (617) 576-3190. If your disk de-
velops a problem within ninety (90) days after pur-
chase, we will replace it at no charge. Otherwise,
there is a replacement fee of $5.00 (U.S. currency).
If you call to report a bug, please provide your re-
lease number, which you can find by typing VER-
SION. Please return your registration card if youíd
like to be on our mailing list and receive our newslet-
ter, THE NEW ZORK TIMES.
24 Instruction Manual
Appendix H
Author Biographies
Marc Blank. A graduate of MIT and the Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Marc has been involved
in writing interactive fiction since its formative period
in the late 1970s. Co-author of the original mainframe
version of ZORK in 1977, he was instrumental in lay-
ing the groundwork for the appearance of interactive
fiction on personal computers in the early 1980s.
He is co-author of ZORK I, ZORK II, ZORK III and
ENCHANTER,Æ and is sole author of DEADLINE,Æ
the first interactive mystery. His continuing work in
interactive technologies in large part made Infocomís
name synonymous with interactive fiction. His
mother still wishes he would practice medicine.
Dave Lebling. Dave Lebling was born in Washington,
D.C. and grew up in suburban Maryland. He at-
tended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and worked at MITís Laboratory for Computer Sci-
ence, where he developed an interest in computer
entertainments. He was a co-author of the original
mainframe ZORK. He has co-authored ZORK I,
ZORK II, ZORK III and ENCHANTER, and written
STARCROSSÆ on his own. He is married and lives
in a suburb of Boston, where his appetite for the
printed word is restrained only by the volume of
his house.
Appendix I
Warranty and Copyright Information
Limited Warranty
This software product and the attached instructional materials are sold
ìAS IS,î without warranty as to their performance. The entire risk as to
the quality and performance of the computer software program is as-
sumed by the user.
However, to the original purchaser of a disk prepared by Infocom
and carrying the Infocom label on the disk jacket, Infocom, Inc. war-
rants the medium on which the program is recorded to be free from
defects in materials and faulty workmanship under normal use and
service for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of purchase. If
during this period a defect on the medium should occur, the medium
may be returned to Infocom, Inc. or to an authorized Infocom, Inc.
dealer, and Infocom, Inc. will replace the medium without charge to
you. Your sole and exclusive remedy in the event of a defect is ex-
pressly limited to replacement of the medium as provided above. This
warranty gives you specific legal rights and you may also have other
rights which vary from state to state.
THE ABOVE WARRANTIES FOR GOODS ARE IN LIEU OF
ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, OR STATUTORY, IN-
CLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY IMPLIED WARRAN-
TIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND OF ANY OTHER WARRANTY OB-
LIGATION ON THE PART OF INFOCOM, INC. SOME STATES
DO NOTALLOW LIMITATIONS ON HOW LONG AN IMPLIED
WARRANTY LASTS, SO THE ABOVE LIMITATION MAY NOT
APPLY TO YOU. IN NO EVENT SHALL INFOCOM, INC. OR
ANYONE ELSE WHO HAS BEEN INVOLVED IN THE CREATION
AND PRODUCTION OF THIS COMPUTER SOFTWARE PRO-
GRAM BE LIABLE FOR INDIRECT, SPECIAL, OR CONSE-
QUENTIAL DAMAGES, SUCH AS, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, LOSS
OF ANTICIPATED PROFITS OR BENEFITS RESULTING FROM
THE USE OF THIS PROGRAM, OR ARISING OUT OF ANY
BREACH OF THIS WARRANTY. SOME STATES DO NOT ALLOW
THE EXCLUSION OR LIMITATION OF INCIDENTAL OR CON-
SEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, SO THE ABOVE LIMITATION MAY
NOT APPLY TO YOU.
N.B. After the warranty period, a defective Infocom disk may be
returned to Infocom, Inc. with a check or money order for $5.00 (U.S.
currency) for replacement.
Copyright
The enclosed software product is copyrighted and all rights are re-
served by Infocom, Inc. It is published exclusively by Infocom, Inc. The
distribution and sale of this product are intended for the use of the origi-
nal purchaser only and for use only on the computer system specified.
Lawful users of this program are hereby licensed only to read the pro-
gram from its medium into memory of a computer solely for the pur-
pose of executing the program. Copying (except for one backup copy on
those systems which provide for it--see Reference Card), duplicating,
selling, or otherwise distributing this product is a violation of the law.
This manual and all other documentation contained herein are copy-
righted and all rights are reserved by Infocom, Inc. These documents
may not, in whole or in part, be copied, photocopied, reproduced,
translated, or reduced to any electronic medium or machine-readable
form without prior consent, in writing, from Infocom, Inc.
Willful violations of the Copyright Law of the United States can result
in civil damages of up to $50,000 in addition to actual damages, plus
criminal penalties of up to one year imprisonment and/or $10,000 fine.
ZORK, DEADLINE, ENCHANTER and STARCROSS are
registered trademarks of Infocom, Inc.
© 1984 Infocom, Inc.
Printed in U.S.A.
© 2001 Activision, Inc. Reproduced with permission. All right reserved.


Buried deep within every ZORK I package: your ZORK I disk, a complete history of the Great Underground Empire
and an incredible map not sold at any gas station known to Mankind.
> Throw the sack at the troll.
The troll, who is remarkably
coordinated, catches the brown sack
and, not having the most discrimi-
nating taste, gleefully eats it. The
flat of the trollís axe hits you on the
headÖ
WELCOME TO ZORK I: THE
GREAT UNDERGROUND EMPIRE.
It beckons you into a world fraught
with danger and discovery. Using
all the cunning you can muster,
youíll plunge far below the surface
of the earth in search of the
incomparable Treasures of Zork.
But this is no mere treasure hunt.
During your amazing journey,
youíll come face to face with
creatures so outlandish, they defy
description. And youíll wander
through an underground domain so
vast, it can offer you new sur-
prises no matter how many times
you explore it.
GET INSIDE A STORY.
GET ONE FROM INFOCOM!
Itís like waking up inside a story!
Load Infocomís interactive fiction
into your computer and discover
yourself at the center of a world
jam-packed with surprising twists,
unique characters and original,
logical, often hilarious puzzles.
For the first time, youíre more
than a passive reader. You can talk
to the story, typing in full English
sentences. And the story talks
right back, communicating entirely
in vividly descriptive prose. Whatís
more, you can actually shape the
storyís course of events through
your choice of actions. And you
have hundreds of alternatives at
every step. In fact, thereís so
much you can see and do, your
adventure can last for weeks and
even months.
To find the Infocom interactive
story thatís right for you, just
choose any one marked with the
level of difficulty listed below that
best matches your current level of
interactive skill.
Introductory: Best introduction
to interactive fiction, with some
built-in hints. Written for everyone
from age 9 up.
Standard: This is Infocomís most
popular level of interactive fiction,
enjoyed by both first-time and
experienced players.
Advanced: A greater level of chal-
lenge. Recommended for those
who've already experienced
Infocomís interactive fiction.
Expert: The ultimate challenge in
interactive fiction.
Then find out what itís like to
get inside a story. Get one from
Infocom. Because with Infocomís
interactive fiction, there's room
for you on every disk.
125 CambridgePark Drive., Cambridge, MA 02140
Interactive Fiction is available for most personal
computers. Call us at 617-576-3190 for availability
information.
Manufactured and Printed in USA
© 1984 Infocom, Inc.
Warranty information enclosed.
ZORK is a registered trademark of Infocom, Inc.